README.md, before:

Language: [English](README.md) | [日本語](README.ja.md)

# Raspberry Pi Pico USB DAC

This project provides firmware to enable the Raspberry Pi Pico as a USB DAC (Digital-to-Analog Converter). It supports USB Audio Class 2.0 (UAC2), allowing it to be used as a high-quality audio output device simply by connecting it to a host such as a PC or smartphone.

## Features

- **USB Audio Class 2.0 Compliant:**
  - Works on many operating systems (Windows, macOS, Linux) without requiring driver installation.
- **High-Resolution Audio Support:**
  - **Sampling Rates:** 44.1kHz, 48kHz, 88.2kHz, 96kHz
  - **Bit Depths:** 16bit, 24bit, 32bit
- **HID Control:**
  - Implements a Human Interface Device (HID) endpoint for custom firmware control. (Currently, only dummy data transmission/reception is implemented. Future feature additions are planned.)
- **Custom USB Stack Implementation:**
  - Features a custom-implemented USB stack for Raspberry Pi Pico with essential functionalities.
    - The USB protocol stack is planned to be refactored into an independent library in the future.

## Required Hardware

- Raspberry Pi Pico
- I2S compatible DAC module (PCM5102A assumed)
- USB cable

## How to Build

### 1. Set Up Development Environment

You need to set up the C/C++ development environment for Raspberry Pi Pico. Please refer to the official documentation to install the Pico SDK and toolchain.

- [Getting started with Raspberry Pi Pico](https://datasheets.raspberrypi.com/pico/getting-started-with-pico.pdf)

### 2. Get the Source Code

```bash
git clone https://github.com/td2sk/pico-dac2
cd pico-dac2
```

### 3. Build

Build the firmware using standard CMake build procedures.

```bash
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ..
make
```

Upon successful compilation, a file named `mdac_adc2.uf2` will be generated in the `build` directory.

### Changing GPIO Pins

The GPIO pins used for I2S can be modified in `CMakeLists.txt`. The default settings are as follows:

- **I2S DATA:** GPIO 22
- **I2S BCLK:** GPIO 20
- **I2S LRCLK:** GPIO 21

```cmake
# CMakeLists.txt

# user configurations
set (PICODAC_I2S_DATA_PIN 22 CACHE STRING "I2S Data Pin")
set (PICODAC_I2S_BASE_CLOCK_PIN 20 CACHE STRING "I2S Base Clock Pin. LRCLK is BASE + 1")
```

## Installation

1. Press and hold the `BOOTSEL` button on the Raspberry Pi Pico while connecting it to your PC via a USB cable.
2. Your PC will recognize it as a mass storage device named `RPI-RP2`.
3. Drag and drop the generated `mdac_adc2.uf2` file into the `RPI-RP2` drive.
4. Once the copy is complete, the Pico will automatically reboot and start executing the firmware.

## Usage

1. Connect your I2S DAC module correctly to the GPIO pins configured in `CMakeLists.txt`.
2. Connect the Pico with the flashed firmware to a host (e.g., PC) via USB.
3. The host OS will automatically recognize a new audio output device named `mdac_adc2` (or similar).
4. Select this device as the output in your OS sound settings and play music or other audio.

## HID Communication

This firmware includes an HID interface for sending and receiving custom commands. `tools/comm.py` is a simple example script that communicates with the device using the Python `hid` library.

The Vendor ID and Product ID can be configured in `CMakeLists.txt`.

- **Vendor ID:** `PICODAC_VENDOR_ID` (default: `0xcafe`)
- **Product ID:** `PICODAC_PRODUCT_ID` (default: `0xbabe`)

## TODO

- [ ] Custom control via HID
- [ ] Debugging/statistics acquisition via HID
- [ ] Refactor USB protocol stack into an independent library

Commit message:

README: Add flow control support via Feedback Endpoint and enhance documentation

README.md, after:

Language: [English](README.md) | [日本語](README.ja.md)

# Raspberry Pi Pico USB DAC

This project provides firmware to enable the Raspberry Pi Pico as a USB DAC (Digital-to-Analog Converter). It supports USB Audio Class 2.0 (UAC2), allowing it to be used as a high-quality audio output device simply by connecting it to a host such as a PC or smartphone.

## Features

- **USB Audio Class 2.0 Compliant:**
  - Works on many operating systems (Windows, macOS, Linux) without requiring driver installation.
  - Supports flow control via the Feedback Endpoint.
- **High-Resolution Audio Support:**
  - **Sampling Rates:** 44.1kHz, 48kHz, 88.2kHz, 96kHz
  - **Bit Depths:** 16bit, 24bit, 32bit
- **HID Control:**
  - Implements a Human Interface Device (HID) endpoint for custom firmware control. (Currently, only dummy data transmission/reception is implemented. Future feature additions are planned.)
- **Custom USB Stack Implementation:**
  - Features a custom-implemented USB stack for Raspberry Pi Pico with essential functionalities.
    - The USB protocol stack is planned to be refactored into an independent library in the future.

## Required Hardware

- Raspberry Pi Pico
- I2S compatible DAC module (PCM5102A assumed)
- USB cable

## How to Build

### 1. Set Up Development Environment

You need to set up the C/C++ development environment for Raspberry Pi Pico. Please refer to the official documentation to install the Pico SDK and toolchain.

- [Getting started with Raspberry Pi Pico](https://datasheets.raspberrypi.com/pico/getting-started-with-pico.pdf)

### 2. Get the Source Code

```bash
git clone https://github.com/td2sk/pico-dac2
cd pico-dac2
```

### 3. Build

Build the firmware using standard CMake build procedures.

```bash
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ..
make
```

Upon successful compilation, a file named `mdac_adc2.uf2` will be generated in the `build` directory.

### Changing GPIO Pins

The GPIO pins used for I2S can be modified in `CMakeLists.txt`. The default settings are as follows:

- **I2S DATA:** GPIO 22
- **I2S BCLK:** GPIO 20
- **I2S LRCLK:** GPIO 21

```cmake
# CMakeLists.txt

# user configurations
set (PICODAC_I2S_DATA_PIN 22 CACHE STRING "I2S Data Pin")
set (PICODAC_I2S_BASE_CLOCK_PIN 20 CACHE STRING "I2S Base Clock Pin. LRCLK is BASE + 1")
```

## Installation

1. Press and hold the `BOOTSEL` button on the Raspberry Pi Pico while connecting it to your PC via a USB cable.
2. Your PC will recognize it as a mass storage device named `RPI-RP2`.
3. Drag and drop the generated `mdac_adc2.uf2` file into the `RPI-RP2` drive.
4. Once the copy is complete, the Pico will automatically reboot and start executing the firmware.

## Usage

1. Connect your I2S DAC module correctly to the GPIO pins configured in `CMakeLists.txt`.
2. Connect the Pico with the flashed firmware to a host (e.g., PC) via USB.
3. The host OS will automatically recognize a new audio output device named `mdac_adc2` (or similar).
4. Select this device as the output in your OS sound settings and play music or other audio.

## HID Communication

This firmware includes an HID interface for sending and receiving custom commands. `tools/comm.py` is a simple example script that communicates with the device using the Python `hid` library.

The Vendor ID and Product ID can be configured in `CMakeLists.txt`.

- **Vendor ID:** `PICODAC_VENDOR_ID` (default: `0xcafe`)
- **Product ID:** `PICODAC_PRODUCT_ID` (default: `0xbabe`)

## TODO

- [ ] Enhance the documentation
- [ ] Custom control via HID
- [ ] Debugging/statistics acquisition via HID
- [ ] Refactor USB protocol stack into an independent library
